We know relatively little about most of Africa’s pre-colonial urban history 
and the role of its cities. This is something especially pronounced in sub-Saharan Africa.
Yet we can get a sense of urban history from diverse sources, including tales from 
travellers and explorers, material evidence of large cities, and import and export records. 
There are also dozens of cities with buildings and districts built centuries ago 
that still exist – especially mosques and medinas.
There is more written on social, economic and political issues on the continent or 
in countries within it, but less on what this meant on the ground for cities and their 
populations – and in turn, what city development meant for these issues.
Evolving city systems
Africa has a rich and varied urban history going back centuries, or more than 2,000 years
for some countries and cities. Indeed, many of today’s large African cities were already 
well-established before colonial rule. Table 1 below lists the largest cities in Africa 
in 1800, including the population at that time, the year the city was founded and 
the rank among all cities in Africa in 2020.
It is worth highlighting that all cities for which we have the year they were founded 
pre-date European colonial rule. Only eight of these 34 largest cities are among 2020’s 
100 largest cities, and five of these are in Northern Africa.
Additionally, while none of the African Cities Research Consortium’s 13 focus cities 
feature in the list of the largest cities in 1800, all are within the largest 100 
for 2020. Five (Lagos, Dar es Salaam, Khartoum, Addis Ababa and Nairobi) are in the 
top 11 largest African cities.
The fundamental reshaping of the urban system and the location of the largest cities in 
all nations reflects the economic and political changes brought about by colonial 
rule – whereby colonial powers tended to avoid the largest cities – and post-colonial 
developments. City systems came to reflect more closely the government hierarchy, 
as the importance of state and provincial capitals grew in many nations, 
along with access to agricultural and mineral resources for export.
Hence, the political and economic changes imparted by colonial rule and 
post-colonial development created a new urban geography. 
Almost all the great historic cities described in the next blog still exist as cities, 
but with much less economic or political importance.
Africa’s largest cities in 1800 and 2020
One striking feature outlined below is how old most of Africa’s cities are. 
Table 1 lists the largest cities in Africa in 1800, their population at the time and 
the date they were founded – referring to the foundation date of a settlement that was 
not a city, or when an already existing city was classified as a city. Table 1 also gives 
the rank of these cities in 2020, allowing us to see how the 34 largest cities in 1800 
fare in 2020.